.TH "xorp" "8" 
.SH "NAME" 
xorp_rtrmgr \(em XORP Router Manager 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR [\fB-a \fIallowed host\fR\fP]  [\fB-n \fIallowed net\fR\fP]  [\fB-b \fIfile\fR\fP]  [\fB-i \fIinterface\fR\fP]  [\fB-p \fIport\fR\fP]  [\fB-q \fIseconds\fR\fP]  [\fB-t \fIdirectory\fR\fP]  [\fB-x \fIdirectory\fR\fP]  [\fB-N\fP]  [\fB-h\fP]  [\fB-v\fP]  
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
This manual page documents briefly the 
\fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR command. 
.PP 
This manual page was written for the \fBDebian\fP distribution 
because the original program does not have a manual page. 
.PP 
\fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR is the program that that manages the whole 
eXtensible Open Router Platform (XORP) platform. The program loads its 
configuration file (commonly named \fBconfig.boot\fP)  
which will read from the current working directory You can specify a 
different filename for the configuration file using the \fB-b\fP     command line flag. The \fB-N\fP "no execute" flag will cause 
\fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR to startup and pretend the router is operating 
normally, but to not actually start any processes. This can be used to 
check configuration files. 
 
.PP 
Typically \fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR must be run as root. This is 
because it starts up processes that need privileged access to insert routes 
into the forwarding path in the kernel. 
.PP 
To interact with the router via the command line interface, the 
operator should use the XORP command shell 
\fBxorpsh\fR. 
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.PP 
\fBxorp_rtrmgr\fR allows the following options: 
.IP "\fB-h\fP         " 10 
Show summary of options. 
.IP "\fB-v\fP         " 10 
Print verbose information. 
.IP "\fB-a \fIallowed host\fR\fP         " 10 
Host allowed by the finder. 
.IP "\fB-n \fIallowed net\fR\fP         " 10 
Subnet allowed by the finder. 
.IP "\fB-b \fIfile\fR\fP         " 10 
Boot configuration file to load. 
.IP "\fB-N\fP         " 10 
Load the configuration but do not execute XRLs and do not start 
processes. 
.IP "\fB-i \fIinterface\fR\fP         " 10 
Set or add an interface run Finder on. 
.IP "\fB-p \fIport\fR\fP         " 10 
Set port to run Finder on. 
.IP "\fB-q \fIseconds\fR\fP         " 10 
Set forced quit period. 
.IP "\fB-t \fIdirectory\fR\fP         " 10 
Specify templates directory. 
.IP "\fB-x \fIdirectory\fR\fP         " 10 
Specify Xrl targets directory. 
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
xorpsh (1) 
.PP 
The programs are documented fully in the \fIXorp 
User Manual\fP available at 
\fB/usr/share/doc/xorp-doc/\fP in Debian systems when the 
xorp-doc package is installed. 
.SH "AUTHOR" 
.PP 
Xorp is Copyright: (c) 2001-2007 International Computer Science 
Institute. 
.PP 
This manual page was written by Javier Fernandez-Sanguino jfs@debian.org for the 
\fBDebian\fP system (but may be used by others). For licensing details 
please see \fB/usr/share/doc/xorp/copyright\fP. 
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Sat 25 Aug 2007, 02:37 
