.TH "xorp" "1" 
.SH "NAME" 
xorpsh \(em XORP Command Shell 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBxorpsh\fR [\fB-c \fIcommand\fR\fP]  [\fB-t \fIdirectory\fR\fP]  [\fB-x \fIdirectory\fR\fP]  [\fB-h\fP]  [\fB-v\fP]  
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
This manual page documents briefly the 
\fBxorpsh\fR command. 
.PP 
This manual page was written for the \fBDebian\fP distribution 
because the original program does not have a manual page. 
.PP 
\fBxorpsh\fR is the command used to  
interact with a eXtensible Open Router Platform (XORP) router. This command 
starts up a command line interface (CLI), that allows the configuration of 
the router and monitoring of the router state. 
 
.PP 
The \fBxorpsh\fR command provides an interactive 
command shell to a XORP user, similar in many ways to the role played by a 
Unix shell.  In a production router \fBxorpsh\fR might be set 
up as an user's login shell \- they would login to the router via ssh and be 
directly in the \fBxorpsh\fR. It can also be run 
directly from the Unix command line. 
 
.PP 
\fBxorpsh\fR should normally be run as a regular user; 
it is neither necessary or desirable to run it as root.  If an user is to 
be permitted to make changes to the running router configuration, that user 
needs to be in the Unix group \fBxorp\fR. 
.PP 
The Debian package installation automatically sets up both a xorp user 
and a xorp group to which this user belongs. However, any user can run the 
\fBxorpsh\fR command unless locally restricted by the 
administrator. 
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.PP 
\fBxorpsh\fR allows the following options: 
.IP "\fB-h\fP         " 10 
Show summary of options. 
.IP "\fB-v\fP         " 10 
Print verbose information. 
.IP "\fB-c \fIcommand\fR\fP         " 10 
Specify command(s) to execute. 
.IP "\fB-t \fIdirectory\fR\fP         " 10 
Specify templates directory. 
.IP "\fB-x \fIdirectory\fR\fP         " 10 
Specify Xrl targets directory. 
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP 
xorp_rtrmgr (8) 
.PP 
This program is documented fully in the \fIXorp User 
Manual\fP, chapter \fICommand Structure\fP, 
available at \fB/usr/share/doc/xorp-doc/\fP in Debian 
systems when the xorp-doc package is installed. 
.SH "AUTHOR" 
.PP 
Xorp is Copyright (c) 2001-2011 XORP, Inc and Others
.PP 
This manual page was written by Javier Fernandez-Sanguino jfs@debian.org for 
the \fBDebian\fP system (but may be used by others). For licensing details 
please see \fB/usr/share/doc/xorp/copyright\fP. 
 
.\" created by instant / docbook-to-man, Sat 25 Aug 2007, 02:37 
.\" manually edit for fixing a typo / Jose Calhariz, Mon 25 Jul 2011, 22:42

